How to  
Build a Table
All the Basics Plus  
One Beautiful Project Plan

30"48"
36"60"A good furniture maker is part artist 
and part engineer. An overemphasis on either side of this equation leads 
to furniture that is ugly, impractical or both. Tables are especially vulnerable in this regard. Tables serve many purposes and are simpler than cabinets or chairs. But this simplicity calls for a thorough knowledge of how wood works when in the form of a large flat surface and an underlying structure.
Regardless of style, there are many mis-
takes lying in wait to spoil the plans of the would-be table maker. Whether you are new to the craft and getting ready to make your first occasional table or are more experienced and aiming to build a showpiece for your dining room, there are many aspects  of table design that you need to consider.
Shape and Size
The design process begins with establishing practical parameters. A dining table needs to accommodate a certain number of people on a regular basis, and more on special occasions. An end table provides space for a lamp and a beverage, and an entry table may hold a vase, the mail or your keys.
In addition to being the right size for its 
use, a table must also fit in the available space. Seating 12 for Thanksgiving dinner is a worthy goal, but not at the expense of daily navigation through the dining room. 
At this early stage of the process, a scale 
drawing of the room or a 3D model in SketchUp will allow you to consider alternatives. Chang-ing your mind at this stage is much easier than it is after you start cutting wood.How T ables W ork
b y  R o b e Rt  W.  L a n g
numerous shapes, 
for
ms and functions 
share a common set  
of issues.
Form follows function. Tables of different sizes, made for different uses,  
share a common set of engineering problems. 
 iLLustRations by the autho RIf you find it difficult to visualize things 
on paper or on the computer screen, you can 
mock up sizes and shapes with cardboard. Put your idea together with packing tape, place it in the room and live with it for a day or two. You don’t want to invest the effort to build the real thing only to hear, “I didn’t realize it would be like that” from someone you love when you’re done.
Consider also how shapes play a role. Rect-
angles are easy shapes to make, but sharp cor-ners are painful reminders of too much table in too little space. Rounded shapes are more adaptable if you need to squeeze in an extra diner or two, but will be more demanding to build. Clipping square corners will protect 
How many for dinner? A rule of thumb for seating is to allow 24"-30" per person around the perimeter 
of the table. But you also must consider the shape and overall size of the table. Extra space is needed 
at each corner, and while a narrow table may accommodate two settings across from each other, there may not be room for serving dishes in between. There is no substitute for a scaled layout. More exam-ples are online at 
popularwoodworking.com/ apr10.your hips or shins if you need to make the 
most of a tight space. 
For dining tables, a simple ratio of human 
body to perimeter space rarely works. Con-sider the available space at corners or across the table, and how that affects the table’s function. The drawings below give some examples, and an article adapted from my book “Drafting & Design for Woodworkers” (Popular Wood-working Books), gives many more (see “Go Online” at the end of the story).
Perfect the plan first, then work on estab-
lishing the proper height for the structural elements. Standard heights have evolved over the years for the distance from floor to tabletop for different types of tables. You may want to 
  ■  popular  woodworking  magazine   April 2010
Coffee or 
Cocktail Tables
16"- 20" high
18"- 24" deep
24"- 42" wideEnd or 
Lamp Tables
16"- 20" high
18"- 24" deep
24"- 42" wide
Sofa or 
Entry Tables
28"- 42" high
12"- 18" deep
30"- 48" wide
Typical dining table is 
29"-30" above ﬂoor. Typical chair seat is 16"-18" above ﬂoor.Space available for apron is limited. Apron height of 2"-3" is typical.
Balance the need to support end of table with clearance for feet. 10"-12" minimum, 16"-18" ideal.
“Figure-8” fasteners 
swivel in partial hole in aprons, allowing top to move.“Buttons” will slide in slots in aprons, allowing top to move.
30"
suggests a method to you that includes the 
phrase, “that will keep it from moving,” be aware that you are listening to a fool.
Wood movement can’t be controlled, but 
it can be directed. In a dining table you can screw the top to the base in the center and use sliding fasteners on the perimeter to let the top move equally toward each long edge. On a desk, you can use a solid connection at the front edge to maintain appearances and force the results of the movement to the back.
In most tables, the wood grain will be in 
line with the longest dimension of the table. If you want an attractive table, use the widest material you can find and arrange the indi-vidual boards for the most attractive appear-ance. Historically, tables were made this way without suffering any dire results.
The common advice to use narrow strips 
and to alternate the direction of growth rings may have some merit if you’re operating a large vary the height to suit your needs, but consider the consequences. Restaurants often provide tables an odd height to make people uncom-fortable so they won’t linger.
Desks and dining tables must also be able 
to accommodate a chair, and the person on the chair, with enough room between the table and wall to get in and out. Compare what you are considering to existing designs, and spend a few minutes with a yardstick, a fold-ing chair and a card table and you’ll find out if the dimensions you’re considering will work in real life.
Start on Top
With the overall parameters of size and shape  established, stylistic and structural details are next in line. Here is where the balance between structure and style is most important. As you develop your plan, consider the forces that will be working against you. Considerations one and two are movement of the top, and leverage on the ends of the legs.
A solid-wood top will move across the grain 
as the seasons change. Moisture (or the lack of it) in the air will migrate to (or from) the top and it will change in width. The number of variables involved makes predicting how much change will take place a guessing game, but it will happen. This is a force that you can’t control, but you can design around it.
In most table designs, the top and the base 
are individual units that work together. The connection between the two must be strong, with some provision for the top to shrink and swell. Cabinetmaker’s buttons and figure-8 fasteners are time-tested solutions. If someone Irresistible force.  Wood movement can’t be 
stopped, but it can be accommodated. When 
attaching a top to a base, use fasteners that will slide or swivel.
No advantage to ugly. If you want an attractive 
top, use the widest boards available and arrange them for appearance (top). Gluing tops from many thin strips with alternating end grain is often presented as good technique. In reality, it is more work, with more opportunities for failure- and it makes an ugly top (bottom).Standard is a range. This range of sizes for occasional tables is only a guide-
line; there are no laws in furniture design.Tight squeeze. Dining tables and desks don’t leave much room for experi-
mentation. If in doubt, pull up a chair and grab a yardstick.
Go with the flow. Attach the top to the base 
structure with a method that allows the top to expand and contract with fluctuations in humidity.
popularwoodworking.com   ■  
Force applied to the end of a 
typical table leg generates leverage on the joints above.Rails and stretchers counteract leverage, but interfere with legroom.
With narrow legs, space for mortises is limited. Tenons are mitered to allow for additional length, not to ﬁt each other at the ends.Wider legs allow tenons to be longer without interference. Taper legs below aprons to make them appear lighter.
Mortises too close to the edge will weaken the leg. Size the components of joints based on the amount of material left in place, not the amount removed.
 Tenons don’t have to be centered. Moving them away from the face of the aprons will leave more material in the leg.
Glue the central mortise and peg the outer mortises to accommodate the cross-grain construction.
Braces across corners provide additional strength with thin legs and aprons. Metal brackets are available that can simplify this joint.
Looks good, what do they do?  Breadboard ends 
might help keep a top from warping; they also might keep elephants away. If you use them, take care to attach them solidly.
The force may be against you. Table legs make excellent levers if there is no supporting structure near 
the bottom end.arrange the boards for appearance. You can 
overcome surfacing problems by adjusting tools and techniques, but you won’t be able to change ugly. Let the wood acclimate to your shop and carefully mill each piece as flat and as straight as you can. Establish a flat surface for gluing to minimize the work you need to do on the assembled top.
Breadboard ends look nice, but their ability 
to keep a top flat is overstated. You won’t be able to straighten out a large warped piece of wood with a skinny straight one. In addition to attaching the breadboard to the top with a tongue and groove, add three or five tenons. The tenon in the center is the only one that should be glued. Allow room for movement in the outer mortises, and use pegs to hold the joint tight. Get used to the fact that the only time you will see the end of the breadboard flush with the edge of the top will be the day you make it.
A Sound Structure
The most common type of support structure is four legs connected by aprons. This design has been used for centuries, but there are weak points. As long as a table is sitting still, skinny legs and aprons are fine. Put some pressure on the bottom of the leg, however (think of drag-ging a heavy table or kicking a leg as you pass by), and there is enough leverage to break apart the joints or the wood around them.
Mortise-and-tenon joints offer the stron-
gest connection, but two aprons intersecting  a leg at a right angle introduce complications, especially if the legs are narrow. Rules based on making a framed panel won’t apply for the size and location of the tenons. 
Size the elements of the joints so that plenty 
of material remains around the mortises.  Tenons don’t have to be centered on an apron’s 
Two joints, one space. Narrow legs leave little room for joinery. Mitering the ends increases the length of 
the tenons; there should be a gap between them where they meet. 
This has your back. No one that matters will ever 
look behind the legs and under the top. Add a 
wood or metal brace behind the corner if you need to.Size and location matter. How much material is 
left around a joint is just as important as the size of the joint. Don’t put strong tenons in weak legs. Justifiable bias. Moving tenons to the back face 
of a rail is one method to avoid a weak area around a tenon.factory, using suspect material and a finish that 
will take the life out of the wood. If you’re care-fully making one table at a time, this procedure will lead you to do more work than necessary to produce an ugly table.
Use the best material you can find for the 
top. It will be the prominent visual feature of your table, and bad decisions during con-struction will haunt you forever. I make tops first so I can pick the best material from what I have available, and I usually spend more time finding the right pieces to put together than I spend in actual fabrication.
Match the color and grain patterns, and 
  ■  popular  woodworking  magazine   April 2010
Span of legs should 
equal 75-80 percentof top diameter
Use hanger bolts in ends of legs to attach to pedestalRails between the legs add strength, but encroach on footroom.Connect the legs on a diagonal and you leave room for your feet.Combinations of connections are also effective and add visual interest.
Many ways to make a connection. Look for a way to secure the legs without interfering with your feet.
“You can use an eraser on the  
drafting table or a sledge hammer on the construction site.”
– Frank Lloyd Wright (1867 - 1959)
American architect, interior designer & educatorthickness; they can be offset if need be. The 
longer the tenon the better, and mitering the ends of tenons that would otherwise intersect gains additional length.
Dominos, dowels and biscuits are easy 
alternatives for mortises and tenons, but won’t be as strong or last as long. Of the three, Domi-nos are the most durable alternative as they most closely approximate a mortise-and-tenon joint. Biscuits should be used in pairs to maxi-mize the meat of the joint. Dowels may seem strong enough in the short term, but over time either the dowels or the holes for them will move out of round and the joints will fail.
A brace at a 45° angle between the aprons  
and behind the leg will not be seen and will add support to smaller pieces. These braces can be made of wood as seen in the drawing on the previous page at bottom right, and held in place with screws or other joinery. There are also a variety of metal brackets available that serve the same purpose.
Even the best joinery won’t eliminate the 
effects of leverage. The addition of rails and stretchers near the bottom of the legs will form a stronger base, but the trade-off is in both appearance and in use. More structure equals a heavier appearance and interferes with legroom. 
On a desk or worktable, rails and stretchers 
may not be a problem, but in dining tables this can be an issue. Horizontal parts near the floor make inviting footrests and are areas where wear will quickly show.
Connecting rails can be like aprons run-
ning from leg to leg, or they can connect pairs of legs. These rails are then connected to each other by a stretcher running the length of the table. A third method is to join the legs from corner to corner, with the cross pieces joined to each other in the center.
The best joint to use is a mortise-and-tenon, 
but there are alternatives. A single dovetail is effective for rails that join legs at the top of the leg. This allows the rail to be thin, and the wedge shape of the dovetail resists the outward movement of the legs. Sliding dovetails are traditionally used on small stands to join legs to a central pedestal.
On a Pedestal
There are alternatives to placing a leg on each corner. Tables that are square or circular can be supported by legs attached to a central post. Keep the footprint as large as is practical to pre-vent the table from tipping if weight is placed on one end. Imagine the ends of the feet to be vertical legs to get an idea of how they will act in their supporting role.In small pedestal tables, such as the iconic 
Shaker candlestand, the legs attach to the ped-estal with sliding dovetails. In commercially made dining tables, the typical connection is with hanger bolts in the ends of the feet, held firm with nuts on the inside of a hol-low post. 
At the top of a pedestal table, a plate wider 
than the column is used as an intermediate connection for the top. With small tables the connection to the column can be a permanent joint. For larger tables, it’s better to use screws or hanger bolts, down to the column and up to the tabletop. 
To make a dining table extend, leave a few 
inches of space between the base and the top for an extension-slide mechanism. In most extension tables, the grain direction is rotated 90˚ to run across the table. This avoids making an end-to-end match where the two halves join. A side-to-side match will be less obvious when the table is closed.
While you could make your own slides, 
buying manufactured ones has advantages. 
Put it on a pedestal. A central column with  
three or four feet is often a good solution in a 
limited space.Opportunity to over-think. In factory-made 
tables, legs bolt on to a hollow pedestal. Small pedestals often connect the legs to the post with sliding dovetails.
popularwoodworking .com   ■  
Tabletop must be thick 
enough to provide stiffness without additional support.End assemblies must be placed in from the end of the tabletop to provide legroom. The feet will become footrests and show wear and tear.
24"
16"Small legs and ﬂush 
aprons leave no room for adequate joints. Solid-wood top in mitered frame will self-destruct due to seasonal wood movement.
Space at end is too narrow to accommodate chair.Aprons too wide to allow room for leg above chair seat. 34"There is a lot of engineering and fitting involved 
in making a slide that will work predictably for an extensive period of time.
Two types of slides are available: one for 
pedestal tables and one for tables with legs. The type for pedestal tables includes a gear mechanism that equalizes the movement from the center outward. The two types are also crowned in opposite directions to compensate for sagging as the table is opened. Equalized slides raise slightly at each end in the open position, and the other raises slightly in the center. When the leaves are in place, the sur-face will be level.
Get the hardware (or at least the actual 
sizes) first and engineer the table around it, with the appropriate space between the base and the top. Attach the slides with screws to the top and to the structure below. If your extension design incorporates an apron, attach the apron to the top. The joint in the apron will likely open as the top moves seasonally. A small piece of trim to cover the gap, attached to one apron only, is a common fix.
The aggregate width of the leaves should 
be a couple inches less than the opening range of the slides. Short dowels with dome-shaped ends will fit the leaves to each other, and to the tabletop. 
On the Beam
Feet can also be placed laterally, and connected by posts and beams to make a trestle table. This time-tested alternative to four legs can simplify joinery and make maximum use of minimal amounts of material. Trestle tables are essentially a series of connected I-beams.
Each end has an obvious “I” shape, but 
looking down on the structure in plan view reveals that the two ends connected by central rails also form an “I.” The top in this scheme often plays a structural role, connecting the outer ends of the upper beams, thus keeping the post-and-beam assemblies at each end from twisting or racking. Hybrid structures are often seen, and are 
a good creative outlet. You can have a trestle form at the base and conventional aprons at the top. Whatever the form, keep an eye on the structural elements. You want the table to be strong and attractive, and you don’t want wood movement of the top causing problems. 
Structural elements will have an impact on 
the appearance of the table. Elements associ-ated with specific styles can look odd if placed inappropriately. The proportions of the ele-ments will also impact the overall proportions and appearance of the final design. Tapers, bevels and curves can make parts appear smaller or thinner than they really are.
The last illustration shows an unfortunate, 
but common combination of design mistakes. For a design to look good, it has to make sense, and ignoring hundreds of years of techniques isn’t wise. Learn the basics and build on a firm foundation – then get creative. 
PWM
Bob is senior editor of this magazine, and the author of 
“Drafting & Design for Woodworkers” and several other 
books. Visit his web site, craftmanplans.com.
Beginner’s bad luck. Table design isn’t always intuitive. The drawing above shows several mistakes that 
beginning table builders tend to make.On the beam. Trestle tables are another alternative to four legs. Trestles provide a strong structure with a 
small amount of wood.
Appearance can be deceiving. Proportions of individual components have an impact on the overall 
perception of a design. These two tables are the same size, shape and basic structure, but make wholly 
different design statements.  Go Online  for more  …
3D models of the tables in the opening illus-tration are available for free download at:
u  popularwoodworking.com/sketchup 
For an article excerpt from “Drafting and Design for Woodworkers” on dining table shapes and sizes, visit:
u  tinyurl.com/ybhanum
For a catalog of manufactured solid wood table legs and kits, visit:
u  tablelegs.com
To purchase the book “Drafting & Design for Woodworkers”, visit:
u  tinyurl.com/ybb2vxq
All of our online products are available at:
u  WoodworkersBookShop.comu
  ■  popular  woodworking  magazine   April 2010
A classic design with extra stability and an antique ﬁnish.Shaker T restle T able
Photos by Al Parrish
popwood.comI’ve built a number of trestle
tables in the Shaker style overthe years, usually following
the style of an original table fromone Shaker collection or anoth-er. But when I decided to do atrestle table for Popular Wood-working readers, I took a second
look at some of the designs anddecided I could add a feature andcome up with a stronger tablewithout sacrificing the simpleShaker lines. 
The one shown here is a stan-
dard two-pedestal table with asingle stretcher tying the basestogether. One of the concernsI’ve always had with this designwas the stability of the joint atthe stretcher. Anyone who hasbeen to a family dinner at myhouse knows that a sturdy tableis important when everyone starts
Half a Foot, not Six Inches
Construction on the base beginswith the feet blanks. The feet ac-tually are two “half-feet” that youface-glue together. This allowsyou to conserve lumber (no sensetrying to ﬁnd 3" x 3" wood for apainted base) and you can makethe mortise for the leg post be-fore gluing the halves together.Mill out the two halves for eachfoot, then clamp the pairs togetherand lay out the two notches thatwill form the 1
1⁄2" x 21⁄4" mortise
for the post tenon. 
There are many ways to re-
move the waste material from thenotches, but I’m a table-saw guy,so that’s where I headed. Use yourmiter gauge and make repeatedpasses across the blade to nib-ble away the waste area on all fourpieces, as shown above.
With the notches cut, it’s time
to make the halves a whole. Whengluing the two halves together,the last thing you want are thepieces to “creep,” or slide on theglue, which will cause misalign-ment. My solution is to mount a1" section of a #6 ﬁnish nail intoone half by drilling a small holeand gluing in the nail piece withthe point out. As you glue thetwo halves, align the two sec-tions and press them together.The nails “bite” into the woodand prevent creeping. Go aheadand clamp the pieces securelyand set them aside to dry.
While the feet could be left
ﬂat at the ﬂoor, it’s not as attrac-tive as shaping them to leave“pads” at either end. It also helpsthe table to sit flat on unevenfloors. To form the pads, clampthe two assembled feet togetherwith the bottoms facing the samedirection. Mark the pads on thefeet according to the illustrations,then drill a 
3⁄8" hole at the tran-
sition point at either end. Thehole itself will create the smallradius for the transition. Aftermaking the two holes per foot,head to the band saw to cut awaythe portion between the radiuscuts to ﬁnish the pad shapes.
Some simple shaping using a
couple of saws will give the feetan even more graceful look. Firstcut a 7° bevel on the ends of thefeet using the table saw. Next,make a mark 
3⁄4" down from the
top edge at the ends of each foot.Make another mark 10
1⁄2" in to-Nibbling away the
mortise locationson the leg halvescan be accom-plished with a ﬂat-tooth rip blade ora dado stack.
by Glen Huey
Glen Huey builds custom furniture in his shop in Middletown, Ohio, for Malcolm L.
Huey & Son. He is a contributing editor for Popular Woodworking and is the author
of “Fine Furniture for a Lifetime.” You can see more of his work at hueyfurniture.com.hungrily reaching for platters of
food. To solve the stability con-cern I doubled-up the hardwarefrom another sturdy piece of fur-niture – the bed. By using a pairof bed bolts at each joint, thistable becomes amazingly stout.
Save Money on Wood
If you’ve seen my other furniture(hueyfurniture.com), you knowI’m addicted to figured maple.Though they’ve tried to get meinto treatment, I haven’t yet ac-cepted that I have a problem. 
But when it came to choos-
ing the wood for this table, evenI had to admit that with such asimple piece, adding busy ﬁgureto the base would be gilding thelily. So I saved the good stuff forthe top and chose to use paintedpoplar to build the base.
Step photos by the author
ward the mortise at the top of the
leg. Connect the two marks andyou have the slope for the top ofeach foot. Head to the band sawand cut the slopes. To ﬁnish thefeet, sand the surfaces and roundall the edges with a 
3⁄16" radius bit
in your router.
Going Vertical
The next step is the 27⁄8" x  27⁄8"
posts. As with the feet, there’s agood chance you’ll need to glueup thinner pieces to form the posts. 
Once assembled and milled
to the size given in the cuttinglist, it’s time to form the tenonsto match the mortises in the feet.Start cutting the tenons by ﬁrstdeﬁning the shoulder on the tablesaw with the posts ﬂat on the saw’stable. Then reset the table saw
POPULAR WOODWORKING October 2003NO. ITEM DIMENSIONS (INCHES) MATERIAL
T W L
❏ 4 Feet halves 111⁄16 3 30 Poplar
❏ 2 Cross braces 11⁄2 4 30 Poplar
❏ 2 Posts 27⁄8 27⁄8 293⁄8 Poplar
❏ 1 Center brace 11⁄2 2 28 Poplar
❏ 1 Stretcher 11⁄2 64 31⁄4 Poplar
❏ 1T o p7⁄8 36 71 Cherry
❏ 2 Breadboard ends7⁄8 11⁄2 38* Cherry
❏10 Top fasteners3⁄47⁄8 21⁄4 Cherry
*Finished size is 36" long.SHAKER TRESTLE TABLEAfter gluing the
halves together, I
ﬁrst drilled two 
3⁄8" holes to deﬁne
the foot pad and
then connected
the dots.The rest
was simple band
saw work.
and run the posts upright to formthe cheeks. Cut two cheeks, thenadjust the fence and cut the othertwo. Make the tenons slightlyoversize and then trim them toachieve a snug ﬁt.
At the tops of the posts, cut
out a notch the width of the postto hold the cross braces. Lay outthis notch using the photos aboveto locate them. Note that thenotches aren’t centered in theposts – rather, they’re offset by
1⁄4" to one side. An easy method
to remove the 4" of waste is tohog the majority out with a bandsaw, then chisel away the re-maining waste. To ﬁnish off theposts, use a chamfer bit in yourrouter to make decorative cutson each edge, stopping 
7⁄8" from
the joinery at each end.Visible Means of Support
The part of the leg that actuallysupports the top is the cross brace.Mill the stock for the cross braces,then use the table saw to nibbleaway the shallow notches (as youdid on the feet halves) on the twoopposing sides of each brace. Thesenotches will ﬁt into the 4"-deep
With the post cut
to shape, the ﬁrst
step in forming the
tenon is to deﬁne
the shoulder on all
four sides.The
miter gauge
(hidden behind the
work) on my saw
works well, while
the rip fence
allows you to set
the shoulder
location.
I use a high-sided
shop-made
tenoning jig to cut
the cheeks on the
tenon.You could
also nibble away
the waste á la the
foot mortise if you
don’t have, or
want to build, a
tenoning jig.
The top of the post is notched 4" deep,
so the table saw won’t cut it (punintended).The band saw will and I usestaggered cuts to remove much of thewood, then chisel out the excess. Noticethe notch isn’t centered on the post, butoffset by 
1⁄4" to one side.
notches at the tops of the leg posts,
so test the fit to make sure it’ssnug, but not too tight.
While the cross braces are
mostly hidden under the table-top, they can be seen at times andtherefore there’s no sense leav-ing them square and chunky. Usethe pattern (at right) to trace3⁄8" hole
Mortise for post
1"3⁄4"4"
popwood.comL6"
8" 2"r.2"31/4"
36"69"
72"
42"
30"3"4"36"
30"31/4"
305/8"21/2"
61/2"
21/2"
61/2"
21/2"
61/2"
21/2"11/2"1/2"1/2"1/2"1/2"
11/2"
11/2"27/8"27/8"
11/2"
111/16"111/16"27/8"7/8"
293/8"11/2"11/2"
27/8"3/4" 1"
3/16"
11/8"3/16"28"Outline of top
5/16" thick
breadboard tenonsSee joinery detail
at right
Cleat half-lappedinto stretcherBreadboard ends -two required
1"t. x 6"l. x 5/8"w. 
tenons both ends Bed boltsCross brace
Foot1"
4"
1" grid
7°
101/2"
3/4"
3/8"41/2"25/8"11/8"
21/4"w. x 3/4"d. 
notch one side11/8"27/8"w. x 3/16"d. notch
both sides 17/16"15"
Outline of post17/16"
11/2" x 21/4" 
x 25/8"l. tenon 1"t. x 6"l. x 5/8"w. tenon 
21/4"w. x 3/4"d. 
notch in half-foot11/2"
3"
Bed bolt1/2"x 3/4"x 2"deep mortise top 
and bottom for bed-bolt nut
11/2"
Stretcher
PostTopCross bracePost
Chamfer7/8"
7/8"Plan - top removed
Proﬁle
Cross-brace layout
Half-foot layout Section through postPost top 
w/cross-brace detail
Elevation
or mark the curved shape on the
pieces themselves. Then use theband saw to cut out the shape onthe braces, cutting wide of theline and then smoothing the curvewith sandpaper. 
Now glue the foot and cross
brace to each post. To add a bitmore strength after the glue hasdried, drill two 
7⁄16" holes (on op-
posite sides of the leg) in eachjoint and pin the joint with dow-els. Make sure to stagger the pinson each side so they don’t runinto each other. Using a knife orsandpaper, taper one end of each
POPULAR WOODWORKING October 2003With the cross braces glued to the posts, they are pegged in position. Clamp them
tight and check for square between the post and brace. Note that the pegs are atopposite corners of the joint.This allows room for the mortise (in the next step).
Here’s the mortise for the stretcher. I removed most of the waste with a Forstner bit,then chiseled the mortise square.peg a bit to make it easier to in-
sert in its hole. After tapping thedowels in place, cut the extralength nearly ﬂush to the leg sur-face and sand it smooth.
Bridging the Gap
With the ends assembled it’s timeto attach the stretcher to tie every-thing together. This is the jointwhere you need all the strengthyou can muster. As I mentionedearlier, I used bed bolts here, butI started with the traditionalmethod of cutting mortises in thelegs and tenons on both ends ofthe stretcher. Start by cutting the1" x 6"-long x 
5⁄8"-deep mortises
on the thicker side of each as-sembly. I used a Forstner bit tomake most of the mortise (seebelow) then chiseled out the wasteto square everything up, but youcould use a router with a straightbit. To create the short tenons onthe stretcher, I used a rabbetingbit in a router to cut rabbets onopposite faces of the stretcher.
If you haven’t used bed bolts
before, they’re essentially heavy-duty bolts that screw into a squarenut buried in a mortise in the otherpiece. After cutting the rabbetson the stretcher, make two 
1⁄2" x
3⁄4" x 2"-deep mortises at each end
of the stretcher, one in the topedge and one in the bottom edge,to hold the bed-bolt nuts.
To add more stability to the
table, a third center brace is half-lapped into the center top of thestretcher. Mill the stock for thispart and use one of the ﬁnishedcross braces as a pattern to shapethe center brace. Next, use theillustration to lay out the deco-rative cut on the bottom edge ofthe stretcher. Then use the table
Sculpting a shape on the cross braces isn’t necessary to keep the table sturdy, but it
does keep it from looking clunky.After transferring the pattern onto the brace, I cutwide of the line on the band saw, then used a spindle sander to smooth the shape.
Getting the holes for the bed bolts straight is important.And the best tool for thattask is the drill press.The two 
7⁄16" holes are located in 11⁄2" from the top and
bottom edges of the mortise.

Double-wide #20 biscuit slots in 
the braces work well to hold thewooden top fasteners (shown in theinset photo).
saw and miter gauge to cut the
half-lap joint for the center brace.This piece is attached with glueand a 2" wood screw, but don’tattach it until you’re done in-stalling the bed bolts.
Use a drill press to make the
holes in the trestle legs for thebed bolts. The holes are 
7⁄16" in
diameter and are in the center ofthe stretcher mortises, 1
1⁄2" from
both the top edge and bottomedge of the mortise. To ﬁnish mak-ing the hole for the bed bolt, slipa stretcher tenon into the endsection, clamping the two piecesﬁrmly. Use a long 
7⁄16" drill bit to
ﬁnish the hole through the endof the stretcher and into the mor-tise area created for the bed-boltnut. The straight hole at the drillpress acts as a guide to drill theremainder of the hole straight.Clean out any waste from thehole, place the nuts into the mor-tises, slide the bolt into the hole,and attach it to the nut. Tightenthe connection with a wrench. 
Holding the Top in Place
I use wooden clips to hold the topin place on the base. The clipshave a rabbet cut on one end thatslips into slots cut into the crossbraces on the base. I use a biscuitcutter set to make a cut for a #20biscuit and start the slot 
1⁄2" down
from the top of the brace. Becausethe tenon on the clip is almost
1⁄4" thick, make two cuts with the
biscuit joiner, lowering the cut-ter to finish the cut at 
1⁄4" wide.
Place two slots on each inside ofthe cross braces and one on ei-ther side of the center brace.
Rather than trying to cut rab-
bets on the ends of the little wood-en clips, start with a 5"-6" wide
popwood.comAfter clamping the stretcher between the
legs and drilling the bed bolt holes into thestretcher I simply dropped the nut into thepreviously cut mortises and bolted the basetogether.SUPPLIES
Ball and Ball
800-257-3711 or ballandball.com4 • 6" bed bolts
#U60-076, $5.15 each
Horton Brasses800-754-9127 or horton-brasses.com4 • 6" bed bolts
#H-73, $3.50 each
Olde Century Colors800-222-3092 or oldecenturycolors.com1 • pint of lamp black acrylic 
latex paint #2022 (waterbase) or #1022 (oil-based), $9.40
Rockler800-279-4441 or rockler.com1 • pint of Sam Maloof 
Oil/Wax Finish #58669, $10.99
10 • #8 x 1
1⁄4" slotted screws
Prices correct as of publication deadline.
piece of wood that is 45⁄8" long
and 3⁄4" thick. Cut a 1⁄2" x 1⁄2" rab-
bet along the end grain leaving
a 1⁄4" tongue. Then rip the piece
into 7⁄8"-wide strips and crosscut
the ends to 21⁄4"-long pieces.
Pre-drill clearance holes in
the wooden clips you’ve just madeto accept a #8 x 1
1⁄4" wood screw.
With a Cherry on Top
Again, trying to avoid admittingI have a curly maple addiction, Ichose cherry for the top. Cut andglue the slab to the ﬁnished sizegiven in the cutting list.
Appropriately, the Shakers
used breadboard ends (traditionallycalled a “clamp”) on their tops tohide the end grain and to helpkeep the top ﬂat. The breadboardrequires a tongue on each end ofthe top for the breadboard to ﬁtover. I created the 
5⁄16"-thick x
1"-long tongue on the top using
a straightedge to guide my routerand a 
3⁄4" pattern bit. 
Use a marking gauge at each
edge to locate the tongue depthand align the straightedge to themark. Set your bit to cut just be-hind the mark on the bottom sideand just covering the mark onthe top side to ensure the bread-boards will ﬁt snugly against thetabletop on the top side.
After the tongue is made, draw
another line on it 
1⁄2" from the
end, running the entire width ofthe top. At four equally spacedlocations on the tongue, mark lo-cations for the 2
1⁄2"-wide tenons.
Trim the tongue around thetenons, leaving them extendingthe full 1". This is where the bread-boards and top will be pinned.
Cut the two breadboard ends
and plow the 
1⁄2"-deep groove the
length of the ends for the tongue.Then lay out the areas that matchup with the extended tongues andcut the 
1⁄2"-deep mortises in the
bottom of the grooves. 
Fit the breadboard ends to the
top and clamp. At each extend-ed tongue, drill a 
1⁄4" hole for the
POPULAR WOODWORKING October 2003PAINTING THE BASE
A simple coat of paint on the base may sufﬁce for
many, but it looked too new and shiny for my taste, soI added an antique ﬁnish to the piece.
Begin by staining the piece and applying two
coats of shellac. Sand the ﬁnish.
Next, mix Olde Century Colors lampblack acrylic
paint with ﬁne sawdust particles and paint the mix-ture onto the base.As the paint dries, wipe with a verywet rag.The wiping will remove paint and dislodgesome of the sawdust pieces leaving a “worn” surface.
Once the paint is dry, apply a coat of Maloof’s
Oil/Wax ﬁnish. Simply brush it on and wipe with aclean rag.This step provides a dull sheen to the paint,adding the look of years of polish.pin. Use a scrap piece on the un-
derside to prevent “blowout.”Remove the ends and elongatethe holes to accommodate woodmovement. Apply glue to onlythe middle 4" of the tongue, re-install the ends, then drive thepins into the holes and apply glueto only the top edge of the hole.Trim the pins and the extra lengthof the breadboards ﬂush.
Finishing Touches
Sand the top with #150 grit sand-paper and rout the edges, top andbottom, with a 3⁄16" roundoverbit. Final sand to #180 grit andapply three to four coats of anoil/varnish blend following theproduct directions, then add atop coat of furniture wax.
After following the instruc-
tions in “Painting the Base” belowto paint and age your base, attachthe top to the base with the wood-en clips and #8 x 1
1⁄4" wood screws. 
You and your table are now
ready for years of family dinnerswith no concerns about slidingthe ham or vegetables onto theﬂoor because of a banquet tablethat’s less than sturdy. 
PWAfter marking and cutting the tenons on the breadboard tongue, use the ﬁnished
tenons to locate the mortises in the already-grooved breadboard ends.
A simple coat of paint looks too new and shinyfor a traditional Shaker piece of furniture.Here I’ve wiped the piece with a very wet cloth asthe paint dried, which removed some of the paint,creating an antique ﬁnish.Mortise location
TenonBreadboard end
TenonMortise location
With the top milled to size, mark a 5⁄16"-thick x 1"-wide tongue on each end with
your marking gauge.Then use a straightedge and a 3⁄4" pattern bit to shape the
tongue on both sides of the top.
Straightedge
Partially completed tongue
Get More Great  
Woodworking Resources!
Your free download is excerpted from the April 2010  
and October 2003 issues of Popular Woodworking Magazine  
and is just a sample of the great furniture projects you can find 
in the ShopWoodworking.com store. Buy more projects today, 
and continue building your knowledge!
Buy the full contents today,  
and continue building  
your knowledge!
